Once around
Corkaroli. Corkeroli is the brightest
star in the constellation of the hunting
dogs, Canis
fanatic. But the constellation stick
diagram just shows two stars, Alpha and
Beta, with a line between them. And it's
a little difficult to see how you make a
pack of hunting dogs out of that. But
nevertheless, that's where they are. And
you can find them by dropping down from
the tail of the great bear. A reasonably
large constellation spread over the area
shown there, but just with those two
modestly bright stars. And the brightest
corkeroli is only third magnitude. So
you can see these are relatively uh
faint and uh not terribly
prominent. Now, the star didn't have a
name until Sir Charles Scarbrook decided
to name it after King Charles I. He was
doctor to King Charles II, son of King
Charles I. And in 1660, he probably
coined the name Charles's Heart. And
it's recorded on a star map of 1673. is
the first record that's been found by
Lamb and it's labeled as Corkeroli Regis
Martus that translates to the heart of
Charles the martyed king. So we know
that it's referring to the executed King
Charles I not to his son the
doctor who of whom was Charles Scarra.
So there is some confusion about that
but it's pretty certain that it's this
way
round 114 light years away from Earth.
So relatively nearby and those estimates
seem to agree from Gaia and Hippacos
surveys. Uh usually we find there's a
slight difference between them. The
Hipparacos satellites seem to have a
tendency to overestimate the distances.
It's a double star easily separated with
a small telescope. The two components
are nearly 20 arcse seconds apart. It's
a lovely image of the two of them here
on the right. And it's been tracked for
a several hundred years since the double
nature of it was identified. And we have
seen that the separation has changed a
little bit by about three arc seconds.
And this is as they are orbiting around
each other, which takes over 8,000 years
to complete one orbit at a distance of
675 astronomical units. So 675 times the
Earth's sun distance. Uh around about 20
times the distance of the Kiper belt
comparing it to our solar system. So
quite a wide orbit indeed. Now it's
because of that orbit that allows us to
know things in detail. In particular,
the mass can be calculated from Kepler's
laws and uh we can easily work out what
the total mass of the system between the
two stars must be and then try to
estimate how it's split between them to
get the individual components.
And individual components are labeled as
alpha one and alpha 2 in a manner which
is determined by their position on the
sky. The one two designation represents
the east west position of the stars not
their brightness. So in fact the
brighter of the two is alpha
2 an a0 class star the hot end of the a
category and that uh that's two steps in
uh intensity brighter and more massive
than the sun about three solar masses 2
and a half times the radius but somewhat
elliptical because these a type stars
seem to spin very rapidly takes just
over 5 days for Alpha 2 to spin around.
And these Aclass stars are also
extremely hot. Uh they have a
temperature of
11,600° for this particular one. Now we
see the magnitude vary slightly just 0.1
magnitude
um 2.84 to 2.98 if we want to be precise
and the light curve is shown there. Now
two interesting things about that. One
is you can see that the total flux
measured there from this data from the
test system um has varied down to about
plus or minus 2 1/2%. So uh a fairly
modest swing in fact and you'll also
notice that the period is
5.46 days. Now that seems to be very
suspiciously similar to the quoted
period for the stars rotation and it
wouldn't be the first time that we have
ended up managing to confuse the two.
So, one of the things that we know about
this type of star is that they have very
very strong magnetic fields around about
2,000 times stronger than the sun and
that they get covered in huge star
spots. And of course, these star spots
cause a variation in the luminosity, the
brightness of the star as they rotate
around. And so maybe that rotation
period and the star spots and the uh
light curve are all getting a little bit
mixed together there. We shall
see. Another feature about this light
from Alpha 2 is the spectrum of it shows
a very strong excess in what we call
some of the peculiar metal elements. So
in this case silicon, mercury and
europium uh along with others are in
excess in the spectrum and we think
these are being brought up to the
surface from the
core and it's a fairly young star. 165
million years that's nothing really. But
of course these A type stars will uh
only live about um uh this sort of age
range of uh perhaps uh as much as uh 500
million years something like
that. The other star Alpha 1 is much
fainter. It's a cooler star FT type
magnitude 5.6.
So would be visible to the naked eye
just in a clear location except for the
fact it's got that very bright companion
right next to it. Um F-Type little bit
more massive 1.46 solar masses and one
and a half times the radius and a little
hotter than the sun at
7,080° Kelvin. So in that yellowy white
region of the F-Type stars and as such
it will live a lot longer than its
component uh alpha 2. The uh alpha 1
component being smaller has probably got
a life in the billions of
years and there's a peculiarity to it
which it seems to be very ironrich. So
that's rather uh strange for um an
F-Type
star. Now in addition to Caucaroli in
this region of the sky, I just wanted to
show that it's well worth exploring
because you can see marked on the map
here four prominent galaxies me a
objects 51, 63, 94, and 106.
And you can use Corkeroli as a little
bit of a signpost or indeed a line
between Corkeroli and the star at the
tip of the tail of the great bear there
to give you a guide to M51 and M63
certainly. And also we shall come on to
the star
Laser. Excellent name. What's that all
about? Well, just before we go on to La
Superbber, these are those four galaxies
and they are all very different. We've
got uh the Whirlpool Galaxy consuming
its smaller neighbor at the top left.
We've got a shell galaxy in the middle.
We've got a galaxy with companions and a
very fluffy looking galaxy. I think
that's called the sunflower galaxy. So
these four are very different and
they're definitely a good part of the
sky to go galaxy surfing if you get the
chance.
So, Las Superbber is labeled as Y in the
catalog. Y canis Vanitisaurum. I can't
say that, but never mind. And uh it's an
amazing color. It's a very very striking
red color. Only just visible to the
naked eye. It's not particularly bright,
but with a telescope, it's worth going
and tracking it down while you're
surfing around the galaxies of this uh
area. And you can see the color even
with pair of
binoculars. And this is a carbon star.
And it's the f nature of it, the carbon
nature of it that gives us the very
intense red color. Here's a lovely image
of La Superba. Just a little bit more
massive than the sun. 1.2 solar masses,
but probably not always. So, it was
probably double the sun's mass when it
was formed, but it has been in the giant
phase for some considerable time now.
And that means it's very old, losing
mass, pouring off into a dust shell
around it. And that dust shell, of
course, is partly why we see so much of
the carbon and also the uh coloration of
the star is affected by the dust. 315
times the radius of uh our sun. So very
much a giant and barely red hot at about
3,000°. We think that it's a late stage
AGB star and astoic giant branch star.
These are kind of super red
giants. After the fusion of hydrogen in
the core on their main sequence life um
led to a core of helium build building
up in the center, they would turn into
an ordinary red giant. And then once
that core became compressed and hot
enough reaching 100 billion degrees, it
would have ignited very violently in a
helium flash. This is because the core
becomes essentially like a helium white
dwarf star in the center of the star, a
degenerate star held up by electron
degeneracy pressure rather than just the
normal thermodynamic pressure. And that
can allow the temperature to increase
dramatically without the size of the
core swelling up. So the effect is that
it reaches the helium ignition point
where helium suddenly starts to be
consumed turning it into carbon and
oxygen and that will cause the uh star
to flare up. It moves across the
Herzbrung Russell diagram onto the
horizontal branch. And as the helium is
then uh consumed and a large carbon
oxygen core starts to build in the
center, then what we find is that the
star goes back towards the giant branch
again, cooling on its outer surface as
the energy production becomes less
efficient with all that inert carbon and
oxygen in the middle. and that uh it
becomes what we call an AGB star, an
asimtoic giant branch star. So a little
bit further up the HR diagram in
luminosity than the ordinary red giants.
And one of the very interesting things
about this type of star is that it
changes
the convection pattern of energy
transport inside the star coming away
from the core. And we get these phases
called dredgeups where material from the
interior is brought to the surface by
enormous convection currents. And that's
how we get that carbon and oxygen making
its way out to the surface and all of
that carbon uh turning into carbon dust
in the solar wind as it's emitting its
outer layers uh as a very violent
outflow that uh reens the color of the
star giving La Superber this amazing red
color and it's very much in its final
stages now. The stellar wind from it is
removing material outwards 1 million
times faster than that occurs in the
solar wind from the sun. And so it won't
be long before Laser has finished this
process off fully ejecting all of its
outer layers, just leaving the exposed
carbon oxygen white dwarf core which
will be immensely hot and gradually
cooling over eons of time. But the
intense radiation from it in the
ultraviolet part of the spectrum
particularly will ionize all the
material in the surrounding region and
create one of these lovely planetary
nebula. This is the ring nebula on the
right here. So this is what Lassub Hera
is destined to turn into at some point
in the not tooistant
future. Okay. Well, that was a quick
tour around a pair of stars. In fact, I
cheated and put La Superber in here as
well. Uh, thanks very much for listening
and I hope you've enjoyed that.